Culver OS – Alpha Edition

Culver OS – Alpha Edition is a customization guide and config snapshot that turns a 10–15‑year‑old government‑issued HP laptop into a minimal, distraction‑free coding and browsing machine. It is not a new Linux distro; it is a documented way to rebuild the same environment on similar low‑spec hardware (2 GB RAM, 32‑bit).
1. Target hardware

Reference machine

    Model: HP 14" government‑issued education laptop (circa 2010–2015)

    CPU: 32‑bit Pentium‑class processor (exact model not required)

    RAM: 2 GB

    Storage: 256 GB SSD (replaced the original HDD)

    GPU: integrated graphics (Intel)

    Input: basic keyboard, touchpad (configured for two‑finger scrolling and two‑finger right‑click)

All steps are written against this machine as a case study; they should work on similar 32‑bit laptops.
2. Base install
2.1. OS image

    Distribution: Lubuntu 18.04 32‑bit (LXDE desktop, chosen because newer Ubuntu LTS dropped 32‑bit ISOs)

    ISO was downloaded from official Lubuntu mirrors (version 18.04.x, 32‑bit).

2.2. Writing the USB

    On another machine, install balenaEtcher.

    Insert a USB stick (4 GB+ is enough).

    In Etcher:

        Select the Lubuntu 18.04 32‑bit ISO.

        Select the USB device.

        Click “Flash”.

    Etcher completely wipes the USB and writes the image.

2.3. Installing on the HP laptop

    Boot from the USB (F9/F12/ESC depending on BIOS).

    Choose “Install Lubuntu”.

    Partitioning:

        Use “Erase disk and install Lubuntu” to keep things simple.

        Install bootloader to the default disk (the 256 GB SSD).

    Follow installer defaults for timezone, username, and password.

    Reboot and remove the USB when prompted.

3. First boot and system basics

After first boot:

bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade

This pulls in security updates while staying on the 18.04 base.

No extra desktop environments were installed. The system remains LXDE with Openbox as its window manager.
4. Desktop look and feel

The philosophy is “simple, readable, and light”.
4.1. LXDE defaults kept

Out of the box, Lubuntu 18.04 LXDE provides:

    A single panel at the top with:

        Main menu

        Window list

        System tray

        Clock

    PCManFM managing the desktop icons.

Culver OS Alpha keeps this structure. The only visual changes are:

    Wallpaper set to a clean mountain/gradient image.

    Panel kept minimal: default applets, no extra clutter.

No heavy theming engines or extra configuration centers were used; most LXQt stuff was deliberately avoided due to crashes on this specific OS version.
5. Application set

Culver OS Alpha focuses on a minimal but usable student toolkit:

    Browser: Firefox (default from Lubuntu).

    Editor/IDE: Geany (lightweight IDE, installed via APT).

    System utilities: file manager, terminal, and basic tools from Lubuntu.

No Neovim, no RetroArch, and no heavy development stacks are treated as “core” in this alpha.
5.1. Geany for beginners

Geany is used mostly with its default settings to keep the learning curve low:

    Out‑of‑the‑box build commands for C/C++ and other languages are left unchanged.

    No plugins or deep customization.

On first run, recommended simple tweaks (optional, but consistent with the environment):

    Enable line numbers: View → Show Line Numbers.

    Enable auto‑save before running: Edit → Preferences → Files → Save before executing (if desired).

    Set indentation to 4 spaces: Edit → Preferences → Editor → Indentation.

This means a new programmer can:

    Create a main.c or main.cpp.

    Press “Compile” and then “Execute” from the toolbar, using Geany’s defaults.

    See output in a terminal without needing to understand build systems.

6. Launcher and keyboard shortcuts

The main “Culver” personality comes from the central launcher and a small set of shortcuts.
6.1. Rofi as the app launcher

Rofi is used to give a modern, floating launcher similar to KRunner.

Install:

bash
sudo apt install rofi

Test from a terminal:

bash
rofi -show drun

This opens the application launcher with installed .desktop entries.
6.2. Shortcut management via lxhotkey

On this system lxhotkey is available and used instead of the LXQt configuration tools (which segfaulted). lxhotkey provides a GUI to map global key combinations.

Key bindings actually used in Culver OS Alpha:

    Super + S → rofi -show drun

    Super + Esc → open the main start/menu (LXDE menu)

    Workspace and window movement shortcuts: existing LXDE defaults shown in lxhotkey (Ctrl+Alt+Arrow, Super+F1–F4, etc.) are left as‑is.

Configuration steps for the Rofi binding:

    Launch lxhotkey (via the menu or by running lxhotkey in a terminal).

    Go to the Programs tab.

    Click Add:

        Command: rofi -show drun

        Hotkey: press Super + S

    Apply and close.

Result: pressing Super+S anywhere shows the centered Rofi launcher over the current window, giving a “mini custom OS” feel.
7. Input and trackpad adjustments

The laptop’s touchpad is tuned to feel more “modern”:

    Two‑finger scrolling is enabled.

    Two‑finger tap or gesture is mapped to right‑click popup (instead of physical button only).

These are done using the standard Lubuntu input settings and libinput defaults, not via any custom daemon:

    Enable two‑finger scrolling in the Mouse/Touchpad settings GUI (LXDE).

    Ensure tap‑to‑click and two‑finger tap → right click are turned on if supported by the hardware.

The goal is to make the old laptop feel closer to a modern touchpad experience with minimal configuration.
8. What is deliberately not included (Alpha constraints)

To keep the base stable and documentable, some ideas were explored but are not part of Culver OS Alpha:

    No LXQt configuration center (lxqt-config), because on this OS version it crashed with “segmentation fault (core dumped)” during testing.

    No third‑party hotkey daemons (like sxhkd) in the alpha snapshot, even though they were investigated as options.

    No Neovim, plugin managers, or advanced terminal workflows.

    No RetroArch or game cores; gaming is out of scope for this first release.

This keeps the repo focused on something a beginner or student can re‑create without debugging obscure crashes.
9. Reproducing Culver OS Alpha on another machine

This repository documents the recipe, not a custom ISO. To rebuild it:

    Find a 32‑bit (or low‑spec) laptop with at least 2 GB RAM and a disk you can erase.

    Download Lubuntu 18.04 32‑bit ISO.

    Flash it to a USB with balenaEtcher.

    Boot and install using “Erase disk and install Lubuntu”.

    After first boot:

        sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade

        sudo apt install rofi geany

    Configure:

        Set wallpaper to a calm, minimal image.

        Use lxhotkey to bind:

            Super+S → rofi -show drun

            Super+Esc → main menu (if not already bound).

        Optionally tweak Geany preferences (line numbers, indentation).

        Enable two‑finger scroll and two‑finger right‑click in mouse settings if supported.

At this point the system should look and behave like the screenshots in the repo: a light LXDE desktop, a centered Rofi launcher on Super+S, and Geany ready for beginner programming.
10. Future work (beyond Alpha)

The Alpha edition is intentionally simple. Future branches/tags can document:

    A “Dev” edition with:

        Neovim plus a minimal init.vim and C++/Python helpers.

        Better tiling/window management shortcuts (possibly with sxhkd).

    A “Student Lab” edition with:

        Office suite (LibreOffice) and PDF tools.

        More polished theming (dark GTK theme and Papirus icons).

    A “Retro” edition with RetroArch, curated cores, and ROM directory structure (for legal backups).

Each of these should stay faithful to the same principles: 2 GB friendly, documented step‑by‑step, and reproducible without deep Linux knowledge.
